>> One of the most important
mechanisms enhancing
the effectiveness of the
immune system isn't even part
of the immune system.
How do three pounds of microbes
provide for our survival?
I'm your host, Bruce
Lipton, for this series
on "Inner Evolution."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The microbiome represents a
community of microorganisms,
including bacteria
and fungi, that
line the surfaces of
the skin and every organ
system connected to the
external environment.
Those systems, for example,
include the digestive tract,
the respiratory tract,
the urogenital tract.
All of these are connected
to the outside environment.
All of those
structures are coated
by a layer of microbes that
constitute the microbiome.
While the human
body is comprised
of about 50 trillion
human cells,
the microbiome community
has from 5 to 10
times more microbial cells than
human cells in our population.
A hundred-pound human carries
approximately three pounds
of microbes on their
body at any time.
The microbiome is so
vital for our survival,
it has been included in
the current definition
of a human being, which is now
described as a super organism.
Supporting the vitality
of the microbiome
is fundamental for
sustaining our health.
So let's dive deeper
into the microbiome.
We must first understand that
the microbiome, comprised
of bacteria and fungi, cover
every surface of the body that
is connected to the
external environment.
Of course, the skin is obvious,
but the respiratory, digestive,
and urogenital system
are also connected
to the exterior environment.
And so all of these
systems have a layer
of microbes on their surface.
We acquire the
microbiome after birth.
Recognizing this important fact,
while a fetus is in the womb,
that's a very
sterile environment.
However, when the water
breaks and the baby
is beginning to
be born, the baby
passes through the uterus
and the vaginal surfaces,
which are lined by the
mother's microbiome.
At this point,
the newborn infant
is already being
inoculated with cells that
will constitute its microbiome.
In addition, as that newborn
starts to wean itself
and breastfeed, guess what.
It also picks up the
microbiome components
of the mother's skin,
and it's inoculated
onto the skin of the newborn.
The microbiome is picked
up immediately after birth
and is added to as a
child begins to develop.
So what is the microbiome doing?
Well, it's a community--
a harmonious community of
bacteria and fungi that
are working together and
forming a layer on the surface.
As we move through the
world, we encounter all kinds
of pathogens in the
environment that
touch the surface of our body.
Significance is we
anticipate that of course
our immune system will manage
these invasive organisms.
But here's a very
important fact.
Most of these
pathogenic organisms
are actually dealt with
not by our immune system,
but by the microbiome.
Because as pathogens enter into
that layer of the microbiome,
the cells in the community
of the microbiome
will do every effort
they can come up with
to get rid of invasive
organisms that will upset
the nature of the community.
So even before germs
can touch your body,
your microbiome has filtered
out almost all of the pathogens
at this point.
The microbiome is therefore the
first deterrent to infection.
So primary consequence
of microbiome-- support
of the immune system.
But guess what.
There's another major
important contribution
that the microbiome
offers to our survival,
and it has to do with supporting
our digestion processes.
We've always been led to
believe that when you eat food
and it enters in the
stomach, that acid will
begin to break down
the food into smaller
and smaller particles.
And as the food moves from
the stomach into the small
intestine, enzymes in the small
intestine-- digestive enzymes--
will further break down the
food into smaller and smaller
pieces.
However, between
the acid in the gut
and the enzymes in
the small intestine,
this does not break down the
food into the building blocks
that the body can absorb.
It is up to the
microbiome in the gut
to do the final
process of digestion,
breaking the smallest
pieces of food
down into the building blocks
that we can absorb in our gut
and use in our body to fulfill
the building and maintenance
of our physiology.
So the microbiome is a necessary
component of digestion,
and the gut bacteria are the
last stage of this digestion
process.
A third function of
microbiome organisms
is that they
exchange information
between their community
and our community
of our own human cells.
So microbiome sends
signals to our cells,
which adjust our genetics.
So our gut cells, the
genes that are active,
are influenced by the
secretion of the microbiome.
In addition, our gut
cells make secretions
that influence the
fate and development
of our microbiome population.
So there's a very
important part.
We cannot digest food
without a microbiome.
A problem that we encounter
almost on a daily basis
is the overuse of antibiotics.
Antibiotics, of course,
were put into a system
to eliminate
pathogenic bacteria.
But the issue is this.
Antibiotics do not necessarily
distinguish between pathogens
and the normal
microbiome cells that we
require for our own survival.
And so when we use
antibiotics, we generally
wipe out our own microbiome.
The same thing occurs,
actually, if we
do get a pathogenic bacterium
that gets into the system,
destroys the microbiome,
and we experience something
such as diarrhea,
which is the cleansing
of the entire digestive tract,
wiping out all of the bacteria.
Well, the problem is now,
oh my goodness, we just
lost the bacteria, either
through antibiotics or invasive
organisms.
What do you think we should do?
And the answer is
very important.
We should start to use
probiotics and prebiotics,
things such as yogurt,
or fermented foods
such as sauerkraut.
These agent support the
growth and maintenance
of our microbiome.
So after a series of
antibiotics or after a diarrhea,
it's very important to
rebuild our microbiome.
Well, an interesting
aspect of this
is, where do we get our new
microbiome cells to replace
the ones that just got lost?
And all of a sudden, guess what.
We find out there is a
use for the appendix,
once thought to be
a vestigial organ,
meaning an organ that
no longer is used by us.
The appendix is the equivalent
of a safety deposit box
that store samples of our
normal microbiome species.
And so after a rush of
antibiotics or diarrhea
eliminates our normal
microbiome in the gut,
the bacteria that are
present in our appendix
are released and reseed
that microbiome to allow
us to continue our survival.
And now there's also a new
insight to the gut microbiome,
and that is this.
The microbiome
cells, the bacteria
and the fungi in
our gut, release
hormones of the same type that
we use in our own biology.
Hormones such as
serotonin or dopamine,
or stress hormones like
norepinephrine and cortisol,
are also manufactured and
secreted by the microbiome.
These hormones are also then
picked up by our biology.
You may have heard of
something called gut feelings.
Well, the microbiome
releasing these hormones
influence our own
system, so we actually
get an expression or
experience of the activity
of these microbiome.
Another aspect we
also have recently
understood about
the microbiome is
they release two very
important hormones
that control our appetite--
leptin and ghrelin.
These hormones actually
control our feeding behavior.
So when the bacteria
release leptin,
it sends a signal saying
we've had enough food,
and then we lose our appetite.
But if the microbiome
cells release ghrelin,
that actually causes us to eat
more because the microbiome is
really calling on us to put
more food into the system
to support the microbiome.
And then our appetite increases.
So it's very interesting,
because many people want
to lose weight,
consciously thinking,
I'm going to control my appetite
by using my consciousness.
And it turns out, guess what.
It's undermined by the
release of leptin and ghrelin
by our own microbiome.
So actually, we have to
deal with the activity
of the microbiome because
it's primary in controlling
our appetite.
So in summary, it's
really important
to recognize that the microbiome
is an important component
of our human biology.
Three primary functions.
A, it helps us
with our digestion
so we can use our
food and metabolites.
B, it's an endocrine system.
It actually releases
hormones that
influence not just their
behavior, but our behavior,
hence the concept
of gut feelings.
And C, one of the most
important aspects,
is that our immune
system is enhanced
by the activity of
the microbiome that
will kill invasive pathogens
even before they touch
the body's surface itself.
So science has now
included the microbiome
as part of a
healthy human being.
Well, we've mentioned
the immune system here,
and I think this is really
a very important time
to talk about another
aspect of the immune system
that most people are
really not familiar with.
And that aspect is actually
talking about lymph.
What is lymph?
It is vital to our
understanding of the nature
of how we stay alive and
how our immune system can
keep us healthy.
Let's first start with,
where does lymph come from?
It comes from blood.
I say, so what's
blood made out of?
Well, it's made out of cells.
Of course, red blood cells
and white blood cells
we're all familiar
with, but these cells
are dissolved in a
fluid called plasma.
I say, well, what's
in the plasma?
Well, the building
blocks that have just
been absorbed from the gut
are part of the plasma.
And the relevance of that
is that then the blood,
as it's moving through the body,
will distribute the building
blocks to the cells so they
can maintain their function.
The plasma also contains
regulatory chemicals,
such as hormones and
emotional chemicals that
influence our life, and the
blood will distribute this
to the body.
I say, well, how do the elements
of the blood get into the body
itself?
Because blood is in a
series of walled vessels,
so blood is contained in
arteries, capillaries,
and veinules.
How does the nutrition
come from the blood vessel
to get into the tissue?
And to understand
this, consider this.
A blood vessel is
lined by a layer
of cells that resemble tiles.
These are cells that are
called endothelial cells.
They're like little flat tiles
that come against each other
with a small space between them.
Well, here's the point.
Arteries are larger
vessels carrying
a very large volume of blood.
But when an artery breaks
down into capillaries,
the capillaries are very small
bore, very small diameter.
I say, well, what's
the consequence?
If you're trying to push a lot
of blood through the artery
and into the
capillary, you can't
get all of that blood to
fit into the capillary
without pressure.
So this is where blood
pressure comes from.
I say, so what?
I say, well, as the
pressure increases,
it forces the fluid
in the blood to slip
between the spaces of
the endothelial cells,
those little spaces
between the tiles.
And I say, well, what comes out?
I say, fluid comes
out, salt comes out,
the building blocks
of nutrients come out.
What about the cells?
No, the cells can't come out.
So the red cells never
leave the blood vessel.
The white cells at this point
don't leave the blood vessels,
either.
The only thing that gets out of
a blood vessel in the capillary
is the fluid.
Now we call the leakage "lymph."
I say, so now the
capillary leaks.
And then I say, so where
is this leakage going?
Well, when the blood fluid
leaks out of the vessel,
it enters into what is
called connective tissue.
Connective tissue is like a
spongy connective material
that lies between the blood
vessels and the functional
cells of the organs in the body.
And so the significance is fluid
comes out of the blood vessel,
moves through the
spongy material,
and goes toward the cells
to nourish the cells
and take care of them.
Well, that means then
the blood is losing
fluid at the capillary end.
At the end of the capillary,
the vessels get larger again
and they form the veins.
Well, just as the capillary
is ending, a lot of fluid
is sucked back into the
blood vessel because
of a process called osmosis.
Osmosis just means there's
a pressure causing fluid
from the outside to come
back in to the vessel.
So at the beginning
of the capillary,
pressure causes the
fluid to leak out.
At the end of the
capillary, osmosis
causes the fluid
to come back in.
But there's a problem.
Not all the fluid can
be returned this way.
There's excess fluid in
the connective tissue.
I say, well, what are you
going to do with this fluid?
Because you have to get
it back to the blood,
otherwise we compromise
the circulatory system.
So the interesting
aspect is this.
There are drains in
the connective tissue--
open drains that lead to a
system of its own capillaries
called lymphatics.
Once the plasma leaks
out of the capillary,
now we call the leakage lymph.
And I say, well, so what's
the function of lymph?
Well it's carrying nutrients
and information to the cells
and supporting their
vitality, the cells especially
of the organs.
Then I said, OK, most of the
lymph gets pulled back in,
but not all of it.
An excess lymph then
has to be returned.
And how it's returned is the
open vessels of lymphatics
are like drains in a sink.
So a matter of fact, using a
sink is a very good analogy.
When you turn on the water,
the pressure of the water
forces the fluid
out of the nozzle,
and now you fill up the sink.
Gravity will pull the fluid and
cause it to go down the drain.
The lymphatics are
analogous to the drain.
So when excess
fluid is coming out
of the vessel that
can't go back in,
that fluid is going
down the drain, which
are the lymphatic vessels.
The lymphatic vessels are
a whole network of vessels
and go back to the heart.
There's something
called a thoracic duct.
Right at the heart, the lymph
is returned back to the blood
again.
So all fluid, ultimately
it comes back in the blood.
There are filters inside
the lymphatic tract
that before the lymph is
returned to the blood vessel,
these filters remove the waste
products that were picked up
by the lymph as it passed
through the connective tissue.
And in these lymph
nodes are immune cells
that will actually
recognize if there
are contaminants or pathogens
that have to be removed.
These immune cells will clear
the lymph of these pathogens
before the lymph is returned.
So lymph nodes are
simply inline filters
that clean the lymph before
that fluid is returned back
to the blood.
And so we have a very important
system, the lymphatic system.
Now, when I go back to
the story of a sink,
I said there's pressure pushing
the water out of the faucet,
but gravity is what brings
it into the lymphatics.
There is no heart to
the lymphatic system.
It only works by gravity.
So think about it this way.
Any lymphatic vessels
in your head, gravity
will drain those
lymphatic vessels down
through the lymph nodes,
filter it, and then
take it to the thoracic
duct and return it back
to the blood at the heart.
But there's an issue.
What about lymph
that's below the heart?
Because remember, gravity
is controlling the flow.
And so what you would anticipate
is, oh my goodness, any lymph
below the heart, by gravity
would then settle down,
go to our feet.
I say, well, then how do
you get the lymph back?
And the answer is
very important,
because the lymphatic vessels,
the lymphatic capillaries
run between the muscles.
But when you
exercise the muscles,
you cause them to contract,
squeeze the muscles.
And the muscles, then
when they contract,
they squeeze the lymphatic.
And so it's like a peristalsis,
a movement of pressure
by muscle that pushes
the lymph back up.
And as the lymph is
being pushed back up,
there are valves in
the lymphatic that
open up to let the lymph go up.
But when the pressure
relaxes for a second,
the valves close, so the
lymph can't go back down.
Point.
Below the neck, the
fluid that's released
by the blood, the
lymph, now going
through the connective tissue,
carrying debris and pathogens
with it, go into the lymphatic
system, and by gravity
are pulled down.
Exercising your legs
and your muscles
causes a contraction,
a peristaltic reaction
that squeezes the lymphatics
and pushes the blood back
up to the heart.
You know what's
interesting-- have you ever
looked at the guards that stand
outside Buckingham Palace,
and they all stand perfectly
straight like this all day
long?
Every now and then,
you see one of them
fall flat on their face.
I say, what was happening?
And the answer is this.
If you don't squeeze the muscles
in the legs by using them,
the lymph doesn't come back up.
And now there's a shortage
of fluid in the blood,
and the pressure changes.
And as a result, an
individual can pass out,
and that's why the
guard will fall down.
But this is also an
important point for you.
If you're not
exercising, the lymph
can become stagnant and not
be returned to the vessels.
So, so far, what do we have?
We have pressure forcing
the fluid out of the blood,
creating lymph running
through the connective tissue,
nourishing the cells in
the surrounding area.
But at the same time,
as the lymph is now
collecting and going down
the drain, the lymphatics,
it's also picking up
pathogens and debris
from cells, et cetera.
so the lymph is
somewhat contaminated.
But as the lymph is going
back up to the heart,
there are inline filters
called lymph nodes that
will remove the pathogens and
also engage in immune response
if any of those pathogens
are very active,
to fight those pathogens.
So that's the nature of
the lymphatic system.
Well, there's an
unfortunate situation,
and that is, we have
something called tonsils.
There are actually
tonsils in the throat.
There are tonsils in
the small intestine.
And the appendix is a
third set of tonsils.
I say, well, what
are tonsils for?
Well let's look at the
ones in the throat.
There are three pairs of
tonsils, meaning six tonsils.
Two above the hard palate, the
roof of the mouth, and those
are called the adenoids.
There are two at the
back of your throat,
and these are called
the palatine tonsils.
And there are two more at
the base of your tongue,
called the sublingual tonsils.
I say, so what's
the significance?
Well, histologically,
when you look at a tonsil,
it almost looks
like a lymph node.
And it was so close
to it that we then
were led to believe that tonsils
are filtering out pathogens
before they go down our throat.
Makes sense.
If we eat food or breathe in
air that have pathogens in it,
as it goes down
the throat, it was
believed that the tonsils
would act like lymph nodes
and clear out these pathogens.
Well, that's what the
belief has always been.
And removing tonsils
has frequently
been just a
characteristic activity.
Oh, your tonsils are inflamed,
and we must take them out.
And so we just look at it as
just a device for filtering.
Well, here's an
interesting point.
The tonsils in the
throat, for example,
are under some of the thickest
lining epithelial cells,
similar to skin.
It's so thick that this would
be the least likely place
an infection would occur.
If you really want to
use a tonsil as a filter,
you'd put it down
lower in the gut
where there's only a single
layer lining the gut cells.
So the question is this.
Why would we put tonsils
to filter out pathogens
under the place that is
least likely to be infected
by pathogens?
The answer is, perhaps because
we have a misunderstanding
of what tonsils are all about.
Tonsils are actually
connected to the lumen,
or the opening of the gut,
with little tiny channels.
Tonsils only actually examine
about 1/1,000 of the material
that's going down the throat.
It's sampling.
I say, why is it sampling?
Because the tonsil
is a learning center.
The tonsil is
learning about what's
coming in from the environment,
and it's actually then training
the immune system.
It's nature's natural
vaccination system.
So when toxic elements
come into the throat,
1/1,000 of the amount going
down the throat goes through
the little channels that
enter into the tonsils.
Inside the tonsils, there are
immune cells that are actually
learning about these pathogens.
When these immune cells
become activated and recognize
the pathogen, guess what?
They move from the tonsils
to the salivary glands.
Why?
And the answer is this.
Well, the immune cells
are making antibodies
against the pathogens that have
just been discovered going down
the throat.
And so if you move
those immune cells
from the tonsil to the
salivary gland, guess what?
In that site, the immune
cells release antibodies
into the saliva
so as now, as you
take in stuff from the outside
environment and swallow it,
the saliva is
carrying immune cells
to neutralize
environmental pathogens.
So tonsils are learning centers.
They're not primarily there
to clear out elements.
And as learning centers,
think about this.
Why do infants stick everything
they can into their mouths?
Because by sticking everything
from the environment
into the mouth, they're
training the tonsils
to understand what's
out in the environment.
They're learning centers.
And so infants will stick
everything into their mouth.
And small part of that
goes into the tonsils.
The tonsils will identify
what's out there,
create an immune cell that
will deal with the pathogens,
put those immune cells
into the salivary glands.
So as you eat or have saliva
going into your mouth,
it carries the antibodies
that will protect us
from environmental pathogens.
So the tonsils are the body's
natural vaccination mechanism.
And I say, why is
this important?
Because over a million
years of evolution
led to the development
of a remarkable system
to deal with the pathogens
in the world that we live in.
And so if you want to
vaccinate an individual,
you would use an oral vaccine.
I say, yeah, but what
if I take a needle
and inject a vaccine
under the skin?
Now you've violated the system.
Why?
The system was designed to read
when any pathogens come in.
If you take a needle and inject
the pathogens under the skin,
you bypass the sentries.
And as a result, now the cells
in the body are dealing with,
where did that come from?
What is it?
How do we deal with this?
You're actually confusing
the immune system
because the system was designed
to recognize pathogens.
And if a pathogen shows up
in the middle of the body
because a needle stuck it there,
the intelligence of the system
has no recognition as to how
it got there, why it got there.
And it will actually
interfere with the health
of that individual.
Well, this is important
for today's world
because now there are up
to 65 different vaccines
that infants get to protect
them from different sorts
of diseases.
Virtually all of
these vaccines are
injected with a syringe, which
means you're not supporting
the immune system that way.
You're actually causing
a confusion of it.
Another very important
fact is this.
The immune system isn't
really very mature
until about two or
three years of age.
And I say, well,
how many vaccines do
the kids get before that age?
Over 50 vaccines.
And the immune system isn't
even fully developed yet.
I say, well, then how does
a child protect itself?
And the answer is
really important.
Because as the child is
developing in the womb,
the mother's blood is feeding
and nourishing that fetus.
But the mother's blood also
carries antibodies in it.
So relevance is this.
The fetus is being
infused with antibodies
against the pathogens that the
mother has already recognized.
So the first part of our immune
system is actually passive.
It's received from the
mother via her blood
and put it into the
blood of the fetus.
Secondarily, during
breastfeeding,
the milk that is
expressed by the breast
also contains antibodies that
were secreted into that milk
by the mother's system.
So how is an infant
protected in the early days?
A, passively from the antibodies
received from the mother's
blood during development.
And B, after birth,
additional antibodies
are provided by breast milk.
So we've had a misunderstanding
about the immune system.
And the fact is, I'm behind
vaccines, but only vaccines
that are presented orally,
because this is nature's
natural mechanism, to provide
an individual with antibody
support.
So in conclusion,
microbiome functions
include neutralizing
infection-causing environmental
agents.
Microbiome provides
the final digestion
and metabolites so we can
absorb the molecular building
blocks in our gut.
And microbiome
provide regulating
coordinating information through
the secretion of hormones
and neurochemicals into the gut
that we absorb into our body
and influence our health.
I added the story of
lymphatics and tonsils
because there's been
a misunderstanding
of the nature of how
we actually provide
for our own immune system.
In our next episode,
we will include
a discussion on the
molecular insights
into the realm of spirituality.
Thank you for joining me.
I'm your host, Bruce Lipton, for
the series on inner evolution
through biological change.
Join me for the
next episode, where
we'll talk about
telomeres and immortality.
[MUSIC PLAYING]